instrgen, adding design doc (#4636)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib: instrgen/docs/design.md

# OpenTelemetry Go Source Automatic Instrumentation - design

> This document describes design of `instrgen` - compile time automatic OpenTelemetry instrumentation for GO programming language.

Reviewer: Change `GO` to `Go`.

From https://go.dev/doc/faq#go_or_golang:

> the language name is written Go, not GO

virtual machine in between. The only component that lives between your program and machine is operating system.
Therefore, to instrument GO programs, injection needs to be done at different level. There are two ways
utilized for now by opentelemetry community for GO:

1) an ebpf (https://ebpf.io/) a technology that allowes "programming" kernel 
   and can be used by native programming languages in general on platforms that provide it.
   
2) compile time instrumentation - used by `instrgen`

## Rationale

Compile time instrumentation is not different by other mechanisms described above.
The fundamental difference is the injection point, instrumentation has to be done 
at compile time which has cons and pros.

GO is perfect language for compile time instrumentation for two main reasons:
- everything what's needed is in standard library
- it's easy to control compilation process due to go compiler architecture

## Design

As mentioned above `instrgen` utilizes toolexec compiler switch (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/4058/).

**NOTE** `driver` executable needs to be accessible via $PATH

### Flow

> `instrgen` driver has two passes. First pass prepares some configuration for second pass based on provided settings,

Author: First pass is necessary to do some static analysis before providing data/suggestions needed for instance for UI. This can be also done as separate executable/program

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason why someone would want to run the steps separately?

it means that the same process is executed twice in different context.

It was designed and implemented this way to take input directly from user via command line switches.

> `driver --inject  /testdata/basic yes main.main`

Author: This shows current switches and might change over time when instrumentation for different libraries/packages will be added

Executable takes few parameters:

> 1) command name
> 2) file pattern - determines files taken into instrumentation
> 3) yes/no - determines whether code should be injected in-place
> 4) entry point - a function from which injection process start

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- command name
- file pattern - determines files taken into instrumentation
- yes/no - determines whether code should be injected in-place
- entry point - a function from which injection process start
```

# OpenTelemetry Go Source Automatic Instrumentation - design

> This document describes design of `instrgen` - compile time automatic instrumentation for GO programming language.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document describes the design of `instrgen` - compile time automatic instrumentation for GO programming language.
```

> This document describes design of `instrgen` - compile time automatic instrumentation for GO programming language.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This document describes design of `instrgen` - compile time automatic OpenTelemetry instrumentation for GO programming language.
```

## Background

Usually techniques used for instrumenting programs in specific languages are connected to runtimes and type systems
used by these languages and depend on capabilities offered by them. Methods differs depending on language properties.

> Is executed by virtual machine? Is statically or dynamically typed?
> What's matter is the injection point.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Are they executed by virtual machine? Are they statically or dynamically typed?
What are the injection points.
```

Author: I'm thinking about last sentence. What I meant here is that language internals influence instrumentation technique.

> In dynamic languages it's very easy to replace original implementation by providing a new one
> usually build on top of original one, a technique called monkey patching (look at python decorators).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In dynamic languages it's very easy to replace original implementation. This is done by providing a new
implementation built on top of the original one. A technique called monkey patching (i.e. Python decorators).
```

> GO is statically typed, natively compiled programming language which means that works on bare methal without
> virtual machine in between. The only component that lives between your program and machine is operating system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Go is statically compiled programming language. Meaning, static binaries are run directly by the kernel, it is not run on a virtual machine with an interpreter.
```

> Therefore, to instrument GO programs, injection needs to be done at different level. There are two ways
> utilized for now by opentelemetry community for GO:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because of this limitation, auto-instrumentation of Go programs is limited to the following:
```

> 1) an ebpf (https://ebpf.io/) a technology that allowes "programming" kernel 
>    and can be used by native programming languages in general on platforms that provide it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Auto-instrument within the kernel itself (i.e. [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/))
```

>    
> 2) compile time instrumentation - used by `instrgen`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Auto-instrument during compilation of the program

The second approach is taken by `instrgen`.
```

## Rationale

Compile time instrumentation is not different by other mechanisms described above.
The fundamental difference is the injection point, instrumentation has to be done 
at compile time which has cons and pros.

GO is perfect language for compile time instrumentation for two main reasons:

> - everything what's needed is in standard library

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- everything that's needed is in standard library
```

- it's easy to control compilation process due to go compiler architecture

## Design

As mentioned above `instrgen` utilizes toolexec compiler switch (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/4058/).

**NOTE** `driver` executable needs to be accessible via $PATH

> 

Reviewer 3: Please add a "Scope" section here

```suggestion
### Scope
```

Include in this section the initial scope of the project and also what the scope does not include.

Based on our conversation at KubeCon the initial scope should include auto-instrumentation of ...

- HTTP handlers 
- gRPC handlers

The initial scope should not include ...

- All functions

A second phase of the project scope will include ...

- Selection mechanisms to instrument additional business logic.

Please be sure to include language stating that `instrgen` is meant to help start the instrumentation process. It is a utility to help take away all the tedious boilerplate work that needs to be done when starting down the manual instrumentation journey.

cc @dashpole please add any other thoughts I missed.

Author: Thx. I planned to add something like scope section.

### Flow
`instrgen` driver has two passes. First pass prepares some configuration for second pass based on provided settings,
it means that the same process is executed twice in different context.

It was designed and implemented this way to take input directly from user via command line switches and to do some

> initial analysis, however this can be splitted into two separaate tools or processes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
initial analysis, however this can be spit into two separate tools or processes.
```

Language and its internals influence instrumentation techniques.
In dynamic languages it's very easy to replace original implementation. This is done by providing a new
implementation built on top of the original one. A technique called monkey patching (i.e. Python decorators).

Go is statically typed, natively compiled programming language which means that works on bare methal without
virtual machine in between. The only component that lives between your program and machine is operating system.
Because of this limitation, auto-instrumentation of Go programs is limited to the following:

1. Auto-instrument within the kernel itself (i.e. [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/))
2. Auto-instrument during compilation of the program

The second approach is taken by `instrgen`.

## Rationale

Compile time instrumentation is not different by other mechanisms described above.
The fundamental difference is the injection point, instrumentation has to be done 
at compile time which has cons and pros.

Go is perfect language for compile time instrumentation for two main reasons:
- everything that's needed is in standard library
- it's easy to control compilation process due to go compiler architecture

> ## Design

Reviewer 2: This document is missing an alternatives considered section.  Were there any other approaches you explored to doing compile-time instrumentation (e.g. alternatives to toolexec)?  Other than choosing not to use eBPF, were there important design decisions you made when creating this?

Author: I started without doing `toolexec`, however `toolexec` has this advantage that you are in the middle of compilation process, so you can see and control everything what go compiler is doing.

Reviewer 2: I'm quite ignorant of the tools available in this space, so part of this is helping me and others understand what you could have done, but didn't decide to do.

As mentioned above `instrgen` utilizes toolexec compiler switch (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/pull/4058/).

**NOTE** `driver` executable needs to be accessible via $PATH

### Flow
`instrgen` driver has two passes. First pass prepares some configuration for second pass based on provided settings,
it means that the same process is executed twice in different context.

It was designed and implemented this way to take input directly from user via command line switches and to do some
initial analysis, however this can be spit into two separate tools or processes.

`driver --inject  /testdata/basic yes main.main`

> Executable takes few parameters:

Reviewer 2: It would also be useful to be able to control which instrumentation libraries are enabled, similar to java: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/automatic/configuration/#suppressing-specific-agent-instrumentation

Author: From the user perspective there is just one pass, there are two internal passes.

Reviewer 2: I think this answer was intended for a different question?

- command name
- file pattern - determines files taken into instrumentation
- yes/no - determines whether code should be injected in-place
- entry point - a function from which injection process start

```sh
usage driver --command [file pattern] replace entrypoint
    command:
	inject                                 (injects open telemetry calls into project code)

> 	prune                                  (prune open telemetry calls

Reviewer 2: what does it mean to prune opentelemetry calls?  Which parts of opentelemetry will it remove (I assume it removes things)?

Author: For now, `instrgen` works in two modes, it can instrument user code in place or instrument intermediate code generated during normal go compiler compilation phase (this changes are invisible to the user). Prune relates to the first one.

```sh
go build -work -a -toolexec driver
```

### Instrumentation

`instrgen` has modular architecture and to add instrumentation for new package, 2 steps are needed,
implementation of specific `PackageRewriter` and its registration.

```go
// PackageRewriter interface does actual input package
// rewriting according to specific criteria.
type PackageRewriter interface {
        // ID Dumps rewriter id.
        Id() string
        // Inject tells whether package should be rewritten.
        Inject(pkg string, filepath string) bool
        // ReplaceSource decides whether input sources should be replaced
        // or all rewriting work should be done in temporary location.
        ReplaceSource(pkg string, filePath string) bool
        // Rewrite does actual package rewriting.
        Rewrite(pkg string, file *ast.File, fset *token.FileSet, trace *os.File)
        // WriteExtraFiles generate additional files that will be linked
        // together to input package.
        // Additional files have to be returned as array of file names.
        WriteExtraFiles(pkg string, destPath string) []string
}
```

#### Example rewriter

```go

> // FunDumper rewrites all functions according to FilePattern.

Reviewer 2: The example below could use more explanation.  FilePattern doesn't seem to be used.

Author: ok

				},
			},
			Lparen: 42,
			Args: []ast.Expr {
				&ast.BasicLit {
					ValuePos: 43,
					Kind: STRING,
					Value: "\" + name +\"",
				},
			},
			Ellipsis: 0,
		},
	}
        return []ast.Stmt{s}

// Rewrite.
func (fd FunDumper) Rewrite(pkg string, file *ast.File, fset *token.FileSet, trace *os.File) {
        visited := make(map[string]bool, 0)
        ast.Inspect(file, func(n ast.Node) bool {
                if funDeclNode, ok := n.(*ast.FuncDecl); ok {
                        // check if functions has been already instrumented
                        if _, ok := visited[fset.Position(file.Pos()).String()+":"+funDeclNode.Name.Name]; !ok {
                                funDeclNode.Body.List = append(makeStmts(funDeclNode.Name.Name), funDeclNode.Body.List...)
                                astutil.AddNamedImport(fset, file, "__myfmt", "fmt")
                                visited[fset.Position(file.Pos()).String()+":"+funDeclNode.Name.Name] = true
                        }
                }
                return true
        })
}

// WriteExtraFiles.
func (FunDumper) WriteExtraFiles(pkg string, destPath string) []string {
        return nil
}
```

### UI

> To lower usage barrier to user `instrgen` offers simple UI where instrumentations of specific functions and libraries

Author: My goal was/is to maximally lower the entry barrier for the end-user. So the tool currently is doing static analysis during the first phase and can show call graph where user can choose which functions he/she is interested about, but that can be addition to the core functionality

can be selected.

![image info](./instrgen.png)

> ### Scope

Reviewer 2: Is context plumbing between instrumentation in-scope?

Is SDK configuration in-scope?  What will the configuration look like?

Author: So, for now I was thinking about enabling/disabling instrumentation of specific libraries or functions. Currently plumbing and SDK configuration was out of scope, however that might evolve.

Reviewer 2: What is the user journey you are proposing, then for the compile-time instrumentation?  I was imagining something like:

### Compile-time User journey

1. User has application without any instrumentation
2. User uses this tool as part of their CI with some configuration for what is instrumented
3. User configures telemetry export using environment variables or the (coming soon) config file.

But that only works if it can do context plumbing and SDK configuration

> ### Scope

Reviewer 2: nit: the Scope section probably belongs before the Design section

First version will provide auto-instrumentation for following libraries:

- HTTP
- gRPC

> In the second phase we plan to add support for auto-instrumentation of selected user defined functions.

Reviewer 2: I know this is the second phase, but i'm still not sure if this API will be less effort for users compared to just using the existing OTel APIs in their code.

Author: My plan to do that was via simple UI or configuration where you could select specific functions.
